docs: how to forward logs to loki (#546)
canonical/pebble: docs/how-to/forward-logs-to-loki.md

# How to forward logs to Loki

> Centralized logging system aggregates logs from different sources into a unified platform, simplifying analysis by providing a central view of the apps: When a single request goes through multiple services, it's much easier to troubleshoot with centralized logs.

Reviewer: Nice intro - I just have a couple of minor adjustments to suggest:

```suggestion
Centralized logging aggregates logs from different sources into a unified platform, simplifying analysis by providing a central view of an app. For instance, when a single request goes through multiple services, it's much easier to troubleshoot with centralized logs.
```

This guide demonstrates how to forward Pebble logs to the centralized logging system [Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/).

> Note: The only logging system that Pebble supports is Grafana Loki.

## Set up Loki and LogCLI

### Loki

> For testing, the easiest way is to [download the latest pre-built binary and run it locally](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/install/local/#install-manually):

Reviewer: Related to my comment [here](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/546/files#r1922952776), I recommend removing the link from this point. Since we provide the steps, people don't need to click the link at this point. We can provide the link after the steps in case the steps didn't work.

```suggestion
For testing, the easiest way is to download the latest pre-built binary and run it locally:
```

After the steps we could say something like:

```
For more information, see [Install Grafana Loki locally](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/install/local/). For information about a production-ready setup, see [Get started with Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/).
```

(I'd probably remove the second link that you had in this part, as people ought to be able to find more info by themselves once they get to the Loki docs)

> 1. Find the latest release on the [releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases/) and download the binary according to our operating system and architecture.

Reviewer: I think "your" would be better than "our" here, because it's talking about something that is dependent on the reader's situation:

```suggestion
1. Find the latest release on the [releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases/) and download the binary according to your operating system and architecture.
```

> 1. Find the latest release on the [releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases/) and download the binary according to our operating system and architecture.

Reviewer: Not a suggestion, just a comment. I suppose we could link to the Loki instructions and not provide any instructions, but personally I like that you've included a condensed summary of the setup steps.

> 1. Find the latest release on the [releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases/) and download the binary according to our operating system and architecture.

Reviewer: Another very minor suggestion:

```suggestion
1. Find the latest release on the [Loki releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases/) and download the binary according to our operating system and architecture.
```

> 1. Download the sample local config by running: `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grafana/loki/main/cmd/loki/loki-local-config.yaml`.

Reviewer: Very minor, I think we can either remove the colon, or probably even better:

```suggestion
1. Download the sample local config: `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grafana/loki/main/cmd/loki/loki-local-config.yaml`.
```

> 1. Run Loki locally by running: `loki-linux-amd64 -config.file=loki-local-config.yaml`.

Reviewer: Minor suggestion matching the previous line:

```suggestion
1. Run Loki locally: `loki-linux-amd64 -config.file=loki-local-config.yaml`.
```

For more information on a production-ready setup, see [Get started with Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/) and [Setup Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/).

### LogCLI

> We may also want to install [LogCLI](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/), a command-line tool for querying logs in Loki. Download the `logcli` binary from the [Loki releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases).

Reviewer: Since we use logcli later in the page, I recommend we adjust this:

```suggestion
We'll also install [LogCLI](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/), a command-line tool for querying logs in Loki. Download the `logcli` binary from the [Loki releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases).
```

# How to forward logs to Loki

Centralized logging aggregates logs from various sources and services into a single, unified platform which simplifies troubleshooting and analysis by providing a centralized view of the application's behavior. This is especially important in microservice architectures. In these distributed systems, a single user request often traverses multiple services, making it incredibly difficult to trace the execution flow and identify the source of errors when relying on individual service logs. Centralized logging addresses this challenge by allowing developers to follow a request's journey across the entire system in one place, making it essential for maintaining observability and improving troubleshooting efficiency.

> With Pebble, we can easily configure log forwarding to centralized logging systems.

Reviewer: Suggest adjusting this to explicitly say the purpose of this doc (matching the approach I'm recommending for #545. Like this:
```suggestion
This guide demonstrates how to forward logs from Pebble to a centralized logging system. 
```

> > Note: At the moment, the only supported logging system is [Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/).

Reviewer: I tend to worry about writing things like "at the moment" because it can cause people (in the future) to question whether the doc is still up-to-date. I'd be happy to say this instead:
```suggestion
> Note: The only logging system that Pebble supports is Grafana Loki.
```

> ## Setup Loki and LogCLI

Reviewer: Minor nit, as "set up" is being used as a verb here
```suggestion
## Set up Loki and LogCLI
```

### Loki

For testing purposes, the easiest way is to [download the latest pre-built binary and run it locally](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/install/local/#install-manually):

- Find the latest release on the [releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases/) and download the binary according to your operating system and architecture.
- Download the sample local config by running: `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grafana/loki/main/cmd/loki/loki-local-config.yaml`.

> - Run Loki locally by running: `loki-linux-amd64 -config.file=loki-local-config.yaml`.

Reviewer: Recommend changing this to a numbered list instead of bullet list

> For more information on a production-ready setup, refer to the official doc [Get started with Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/) and [Setup Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/).

Reviewer: I don't think there's a need to say "official doc":
```suggestion
For more information on a production-ready setup, see [Get started with Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/) and [Setup Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/).
```

### LogCLI

Besides Loki itself, you may also want to install [LogCLI](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/), which is a command-line tool for querying and exploring logs in Loki. Download the `logcli` binary from the [Loki releases page](https://github.com/grafana/loki/releases).

> For more information, see LogCLI installation and reference [here](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/getting-started/) and a tutorial [here](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/logcli-tutorial/).

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer to use the link titles:
```suggestion
For more information, see [LogCLI getting started](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/getting-started/) and [LogCLI tutorial](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/logcli-tutorial/).
```

> ## Forward all services' logs to Loki

Reviewer: Personally I find this slightly awkward to read, even though it's right! How about this wording instead:
```suggestion
## Forward logs from all services to Loki
```

To forward logs to a Loki server running at `http://localhost:3100`, use the following config:

```yaml
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
```

> The configuration above creates a log target named "test" of type Loki with an override policy set to "merge", and it will forward all services' logs to this target.

Reviewer: I would be OK to remove this sentence, as I think the config example pretty much explains it. Maybe the name needs emphasizing though, in which case how about:
```suggestion
This configuration creates a log target named "test".
```

For more information on log forwarding and `log-targets` configuration, see {ref}`log_forwarding_usage`.

## Query logs in Loki

> To confirm logs are successfully forwarded to Loki, use `logcli` to query.

Reviewer: Minor wording nit - I'd probably write this as:
```suggestion
To verify that logs have been forwarded to Loki, use `logcli`.
```

http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query_range?direction=BACKWARD&end=1735748593047338924&limit=30&query=%7Bpebble_service%3D%22svc1%22%7D&start=1735744993047338924
Common labels: {pebble_service="svc1", service_name="unknown_service"}
2025-01-02T00:22:45+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} * Debugger PIN: 411-846-353
2025-01-02T00:22:45+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} * Debugger is active!
2025-01-02T00:22:44+08:00 {detected_level="warn"}    WARNING: This is a development server. Do not use it in a production deployment. Use a production WSGI server instead.
2025-01-02T00:22:44+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} * Restarting with stat
2025-01-02T00:22:44+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} Press CTRL+C to quit
2025-01-02T00:22:44+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} * Running on http://127.0.0.1:5000
2025-01-02T00:22:44+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} * Debug mode: on
2025-01-02T00:22:44+08:00 {detected_level="unknown"} * Serving Flask app 'main'
http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query_range?direction=BACKWARD&end=1735748564935000001&limit=24&query=%7Bpebble_service%3D%22svc1%22%7D&start=1735744993047338924
```

> ## Forward selected services' logs
> 
> In the previous sections, we specified `[all]` for `services`, which will forward all logs from all services to the target.
> 
> If you want to specify which services' logs to forward explicitly, list service names in `services`. For example:
> 
> ```yaml
> log-targets:
>   test:
>     override: merge
>     type: loki
>     location: http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push
>     services: [svc1, svc2]
> ```
> 
> This will only forward logs from services `svc1` and `svc2`.
> 
> For more information on `services` configuration, see {ref}`log_forwarding_specify_services`.

Reviewer: This key difference between this section and the section about forwarding logs from all services is the list of services. Since everything else is the same, how about combining both sections into a single section, something like this:

````suggestion
## Forward service logs to Loki

To forward logs to a Loki server running at `http://localhost:3100`, use the following config:

```yaml
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
```

This configuration creates a log target named "test" and will forward logs from all services.

To specify which services to forward logs from, list the service names in `services`. For example:

```yaml
    services: [svc1, svc2]
```

This will only forward logs from services `svc1` and `svc2`.

For more information about `log-targets` configuration, see [](../reference/log-forwarding).
````

## Forward logs to multiple targets

> We can forward logs to multiple targets.

Reviewer: Suggest removing this paragraph, as it's repeating the title
```suggestion
```

> For example, if we have a Loki for the test environment running at `http://my-test-loki-server:3100` and another Loki for the staging environment running at `http://my-staging-loki-server:3100`, combining with the `services` feature mentioned above, we can specify two log targets:

Reviewer: I think it would be easier to read (and still just as helpful) if we remove the part about `services`:
```suggestion
For example, if we have a Loki for the test environment running at `http://my-test-loki-server:3100` and another Loki for the staging environment running at `http://my-staging-loki-server:3100`, we can specify two log targets:
```

```yaml
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-test-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
  staging:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-staging-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
```

> We can also combine this feature with the previously mentioned "service selection" feature to forward different services' logs to different targets. For example:

Reviewer: This could be simplified for easier reading - something like:
```suggestion
Or, to specify which services to forward logs from:
```

```yaml
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-test-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [svc1, svc2]
  staging:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-staging-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [svc3, svc4]
```

> This will forward logs from `svc1` and `svc2` to the test target, and logs from `svc3` and `svc4` will be forwarded to the staging target.

Reviewer: Small suggestion for consistency:
```suggestion
This will forward logs from `svc1` and `svc2` to the test target, and logs from `svc3` and `svc4` to the staging target.
```

## Remove services

> To remove a service from a log target when merging, prefix the service name with a minus `-`. For example, if we have a base layer with:

Reviewer: Maybe say "merging another layer", since this is the first time we're explicitly talking about merging layers:
```suggestion
To remove a service from a log target when merging another layer, prefix the service name with a minus `-`. For example, if we have a base layer with:
```

```yaml
my-target:
  services: [svc1, svc2]
```

> And override layer with:

Reviewer: Tiny nit - I would say "an override layer" here:
```suggestion
And an override layer with:
```

```yaml
my-target:
  services: [-svc1]
  override: merge
```

Then in the merged layer, the `services` list will be merged to `[svc2]`, so `my-target` will collect logs from only `svc2`.

We can also use `-all` to remove all services. For example, adding an override layer with:

```yaml
my-target:
  services: [-all]
  override: merge
```

This would remove all services from `my-target`, effectively disabling `my-target`.

> Meanwhile, adding an override layer with:
> 
> ```yaml
> my-target:
>   services: [-all, svc1]
>   override: merge
> ```
> 
> This would remove all services and then add `svc1`, so `my-target` would receive logs from only `svc1`.

Reviewer: I'd reorganize slightly and put the description above, to reduce reading. Something like:
````suggestion
To make sure that `my-target` only receives logs from `svc1`, use this override layer instead:

```yaml
my-target:
  services: [-all, svc1]
  override: merge
```
````

## Use labels

> Besides the default label Pebble adds to all outgoing logs, we can add more labels to service logs.

Reviewer: This is really helpful to quickly summarize the point of labels. Before I started reading the section, I wasn't 100% what labels might refer to

For example, to add a label `env` with the value `test` to a log target:

```yaml
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-test-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
    labels:
      env: test

> ```

Reviewer: Want to double check - is it important/meaningful for the label (`test`) to match the target name (`test`)? Should we use a different example for the label, to prevent people from thinking the names have to be related?

> The label values may contain `$ENV_VARS`, which will be interpolated using the environment variables for the corresponding service. With this feature, we can add "dynamic" labels - different labels for different services. For example, given the following layer configuration:

Reviewer: This is cool - I didn't know this!

I think it's fine to drop `$ENV_VARS` since the example shows the format. Suggest a slight rewording:
```suggestion
The label values may contain environment variables that are defined for services. With this feature, we can add "dynamic" labels - different labels for different services. For example, given the following layer configuration:
```

```yaml
summary: a simple layer
services:
  svc1:
    override: replace
    command: foo
    environment:
      OWNER: 'alice'
  svc2:
    override: replace
    command: bar
    environment:
      OWNER: 'bob'
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
    labels:
      owner: 'user-$OWNER'
```

The logs from `svc1` will be sent with the following labels:

```
pebble_service: svc1  # default label
owner: user-alice     # env var $OWNER substituted
```

> And for svc2, the labels will be:

Reviewer: Code font is missing for sv2
```suggestion
And for `svc2`, the labels will be:
```

```
pebble_service: svc2  # default label
owner: user-bob       # env var $OWNER substituted
```

For more information on `labels`, see {ref}`log_forwarding_labels`.

## See more

> - [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification)
> - [Log forwarding](../reference/log-forwarding)
> - [Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/)
> - [Get started with Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/)
> - [Setup Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/)
> - [LogCLI](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/)
> - [LogCLI installation and reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/getting-started/)
> - [LogCLI tutorial](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/logcli-tutorial/)

Reviewer: How about we split this list into two parts, to make it totally clear what is related to Pebble. Also, I don't think we need so many Loki-related links. Something like this:
```suggestion
Pebble:
- [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification)
- [Log forwarding](../reference/log-forwarding)

Loki:
- [Get started with Grafana Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/)
- [Set up Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/)
- [LogCLI installation and reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/getting-started/)
- [LogCLI tutorial](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/logcli/logcli-tutorial/)
```
